good evening the two weeks ago I set out
the progress we as a country have made
against our five tests for adjusting the
lockdown and the measures we could
introduce as a result and today I want
to update you again on those five tests
and set out some further changes that we
can now make so can I have the first
slide please thank you the five tests
are designed as you know to ensure that
any changes to the lockdown are careful
proportionate and safe they combine
analysis of the latest data on the
spread of the disease with assessments
of how well we are placed to meet the
operational challenges posed by the
virus we must do everything in our power
to avoid a second peak of infection that
overwhelms the NHS because that would
lead to more lives lost more families in
mourning and more disruption to our
economy and way of life next slide
please
our first test is to protect the NHS is
ability to cope so that we're confident
we're able to provide sufficient
critical care and specialist treatment
right across the UK and it's thanks to
the efforts of those working in the NHS
that we can still be confident the NHS
can cope on 7th of June 443 people were
admitted to hospital with coronavirus in
England Wales and Northern Ireland down
from 628 two weeks earlier and down from
a peak of 3431
on the 1st of April and on the 9th of
June 492 patients with coronavirus were
in mechanical ventilation beds in the UK
down from 848 two weeks earlier and down
from a peak of 3,300 one on the 12th of
April so that means we're still meeting
the first test meaning the first test
next slide please
our second test is to see a sustained
and consistent fall in the daily death
rates from kovat 19 so we're confident
we've moved beyond the peak and of those
who have tested positive for coronavirus
across all settings I'm sad to say that
40 1128 have now died that's an increase
of 245 fatalities since yesterday as
measured by a seven-day rolling average
the UK daily death rate now stands at
200 down from 300 two weeks ago and down
from a peak of 943
on the 14th of April so the death rate
has continued to fall and so the second
test is still being met next slide
please
our third test is to receive reliable
data from sage showing that the rate of
infection the number of people catching
kovat is decreasing to manageable levels
across the board in total 290,000 143
people have now tested positive for
coronavirus which is an increase of 1003
cases since yesterday the seven-day
rolling average of new positive cases
found through testing is now 1419 down
from 2416 two weeks ago and down from a
peak of 5195 in the first week of May in
a moment Sir Patrick will talk us
through sages latest assessment of the
AR and other evidence on infection rates
based on the various data available the
government is satisfied the third test
is being met next slide please
our fourth test is that we must be
confident that the range of operational
challenges including on
testing capacity and personal protective
equipment are in hand with supply able
to meet future demand yesterday a
hundred and seventy thousand three
hundred and seventy nine tests were
carried out and posted out carried out
all posted out I should say across the
UK are compared to around twelve
thousand at the start of April the total
now stands at six million forty two
thousand six hundred and twenty two
tomorrow the health secretary will
provide an update on how NHS tests and
trace is performing on PPE we have
secured over 150 deals with new
suppliers around the world and procured
2.2 billion items of PPE to be
manufactured domestically
despite the immensely frustrating
difficulties we faced with PPE and
testing in the past this progress means
we are now satisfied that the fourth
test is being met of course we remain
vigilant next slide please
our fifth and final test is that we must
be confident that any adjustments to the
current measures will not risk a second
peak of infections that overwhelms the
NHS and I'm grateful to the chief
scientific adviser and the chief medical
officer for their advice on the measures
I'm about to set out and on this basis I
can confirm that the government judges
we have met the fifth test therefore the
government is satisfied that all five
tests are met or still being met and we
can proceed with the following further
adjustments to the lockdown in England a
month ago I set out our roadmap to
recovery and that explained the gradual
steps we would take to ease lockdown as
the data and the evidence allows the
measures it contained were all
conditional
and conditional on continued progress in
tackling the virus we are continuing to
follow our roadmap while adjusting our
approach as we need to as we always said
we would although we are tackling this
virus as one United Kingdom it remains
the case that the devolved
administration's are responsible for
lockdown in Scotland Wales and Northern
Ireland and it's right that they should
move at the right pace for them
according to their circumstances and so
for that reason the specific measures
I'm about to set out apply in England
only first on retail shops this has been
the most challenging period for shops
and high streets in our history never
before of all shops been ordered to shut
in this way it's now been 82 days since
we asked these shops to close their
doors and I know the toll this has taken
which is why I am so pleased that as the
business secretary confirmed yesterday
we can now allow all shops to reopen
from Monday it's vital that
establishments should ensure their
meeting COBIT secure guidelines before
they reopen that way we can keep staff
and customers safe while we get retail
going second on social contact I know
how difficult the past months have been
for people cut off from their friends
and family last Monday we relaxed the
rules on meeting outdoors so that groups
of up to six could gather provided they
are socially distant we did so in the
knowledge that transmission of the virus
is much lower outdoors so we could make
this change in a safe way but there are
too many people still too many people
particularly those who live by
themselves who are lonely and struggling
with being unable to see friends and
family so from this weekend we will
allow single adult household
adults living alone or single parents
with children under 18 to form a support
bubble a support bubble with one other
household all those in a support bubble
will be able to act as if they live in
the same household meaning they can
spend time together inside each other's
homes and do not need to stay two metres
apart I wanna stress that support
bubbles must be exclusive meaning you
can't switch the household you are in a
bubble with or connect with multiple
households and if any member of the
support bubble develops symptoms all
members of the bubble will need to
follow the normal advice on household
isolation we're making this change to
support those who are particularly
lonely as a result of lockdown measures
it's a targeted intervention to limit
the most harmful effects of the current
social restrictions it is emphatically
not designed for people who don't
qualify to start meeting inside other
people's homes because that remains
against the law unfortunately we cannot
advise anyone who is shielding to form a
support bubble at this stage given their
particular vulnerability to the virus
however I want to say I know how hard it
is for those of you who are shielding
and we will say more next week about the
arrangements that will be in place for
you beyond the end of June third on
outdoor attractions because the risk of
transmission is lower outdoors we can't
open up some more outdoor attractions
for people to enjoy this summer so from
Monday we will allow outdoor attractions
where people can stay in their cars such
as Safari parks and drive in cinemas to
open
I'm very grateful to the zoo industry
for their cooperation and forbearance
and I'm happy to confirm that they too
can reopen from Monday provided visitor
numbers are managed and safeguards put
in place that includes keeping indoor
areas such as reptile houses closed and
facilitating social distancing finally
we will allow places of worship to open
for individual prayer this weekend and I
hope that will be of some comfort to
those of faith who have been unable to
go to their place of worship as set out
in our roadmap the next set of changes
step 3 will not begin until the fourth
of July at the earliest as the evidence
allows I know that these changes are
only incremental and that some of you
many of you may be hoping and waiting
for more I also know that people will
once again find anomalies or apparent
anomalies in what people can and cannot
do and as I've said before I'm afraid
that is just inevitable when we're only
able to give people a small amount of
the freedoms that they usually enjoy we
will continue to remain cautious and
measure the effect of the changes that
we make and as I've always said we won't
hesitate to apply the brakes if that is
what the situation requires and that has
meant moving slower than we would have
liked in some areas it's because the
rate of infection is not yet quite low
enough and because we're not able to
change our social distancing advice
including smaller class sizes in schools
that we are not proceeding with our
ambition to bring back all primary
pupils at least for some weeks before
the summer holidays instead we're
working with teachers to bring back as
many pupils as we can
within those smaller class sizes we do
fully intend to bring back all children
back to school in September provided the
progress we are making continues so I
hope it will that is our focus and it is
consistent that is with the approach
that's been taken by many other
countries in Europe in the meantime we
must stick to our roadmap I urge
everyone to continue to show restraint
and respect the rules which are designed
to keep us all safe and it's only
because of the restraint that everyone
you've all shown so far that we're able
to move gradually out of this lockdown
so please to repeat what you've heard so
many times before stay alert and
maintain social distancing keep washing
your hands help control the virus by
getting tested if you have symptoms and
isolating if you are contacted by NHS
tests and trace then we all do that
together we'll all save lives and begin
to rebuild our country and I'll now hand
over to Sir Patrick
thank you very much it's my first slide
just a reminder on the our number the
our number describes how many people
become infected by one infected person
so when it's three it means every person
is infecting on average three more and
the epidemic grows very quickly when the
are is one one person infects one other
and the epidemic stays at the same size
and when it's below one the epidemic is
shrinking the way that we calculate the
R is different with different models so
that the ultimate value that we give
from Sage is the combination and looking
at 13 different models went into this
particular one so 13 different groups
looking at the are separately coming up
with a consensus value as to where the
are true are lies and the view is that
the R in the UK at the moment is
somewhere between
point seven and point nine so it remains
below one and it remains below one
across the UK that means that the
epidemic continues to decrease in size
it's worth just reflecting that it's
possible to do this when you amalgamate
lots of different models and when you
have a lot of data across the whole of a
country it's much more difficult to come
up with an accurate value of are when
you get down to regional and local
levels and therefore other numbers
become important it is worth saying that
on the data we do have the R is below 1
in every region but looking at growth is
the other important area is the epidemic
growing or shrinking and these growth
rates again are important to look at
suggesting that the epidemic is
shrinking in every region and the third
thing to look at is the incidence and
number of new cases which becomes
increasingly important locally and also
becomes important when one thinks about
outbreaks and clusters which are
important to pick up as the overall
numbers come down and that's an
important part of the role of the joint
biosecurity Center so we need to move to
different measures as we get to local
and regional areas in order to get a
proper assessment of what's happening
with the epidemic next slide please
this shows some of the numbers from the
Office for National Statistics survey
from England we're at the moment over
the past two weeks were from 17th May to
the 30th of May this covers it was
estimated that not 0.1% of the
population had kovat so that's one in a
thousand people meaning that the
estimated total number of people in the
country work over during that period
53,000 that speaks to the point the
Prime Minister just made that the
numbers are not yet very low they're low
they're coming down but they're not yet
very low the second point is how many
new cases there are and here this ons
survey estimates that there are 39
thousand new cases every week
that means roughly five or six thousand
per day new cases being picked up
somewhere in the UK over that period
these numbers again are lower than they
were they're on the way down they're not
yet very low in terms of who's already
habit one way you can detect that is
through an antibody test to find out
who's been exposed to the virus and here
the numbers change across the UK so in
London
it may be fifteen percent or so people
have had it across the UK as a whole it
looks like it's around six or seven
percent of people have had it so if I
tie those points together the R is below
one but perhaps only just below one the
epidemic is shrinking but not fast
numbers are coming down but they're not
yet very low and the vast majority of
the population remain susceptible to
this infection that urges caution it
urges going slowly with changes and it
urges measuring very carefully to see
the impact and being prepared to reverse
things where measures have been taken
that have an impact on this and
importantly it also means looking for
outbreaks locally and dealing with those
fast final slide please the reason which
is obvious to us all but worth restating
this is important is that tragically
there have been many deaths from this
disease and this shows the ons data on
weekly death registrations over time so
the top line here shows the line for
this year the dotted line shows the line
for the previous five years and what you
can see is that on average there's
somewhere between ten and fifteen
thousand deaths per week and you can see
the very clear peak that started at the
end of March and has now come down
almost back to baseline which is
entirely due to the effects that kovat
has had both direct and indirect in
terms of the other effects across
society and you can see here the peak
and the fact that it's coming down and
unfortunately
this has not affected everybody equally
so we know the elderly have been
particularly susceptible we know that
those with other diseases have been sick
you'll early susceptible and we know of
course tragically that the BME community
have been particularly affected by this
this curve reminds us why it's so
important to carry on doing the basics
hand hygiene keeping ourselves separated
not going to break the social distancing
rules that are in place and to make sure
that we go cautiously step-by-step
measure as we go and are prepared to
reverse where it's necessary to do so
thank you thanks very much Patrick
anything to add that Chris no in that
case thank you very much
let's go to questions from the public
first Ruth in Bournemouth I am thrilled
to see outlets opened selling coffee
takeaway food and ice creams but some
concern to see many doing so without
wearing gloves and masks with masks
mandatory now in many settings surely
they're essential for those serving food
and drinks to the public how else would
protect it from those serving
transmitting coronavirus and the
unfortunate event they have it and are
not at that point aware well thank you
very much for of course as we as we open
up shops and and other places selling
coffee and beverages to the public we're
sending out all sorts of guidelines
about how to do it in a in a coded
secure way I mean the basic guidance on
on masks as you know is that usual face
coverings I should say you should wear a
face covering when you're likely to be
in in close contact with people that you
don't normally meet I think I'll go to
to Chris and Patrick ready for a comment
on on whether gloves and and face
coverings should be absolutely necessary
in all retail contacts but we're
certainly setting out guidelines for
couvade secure venues Patrick well face
coverings the sage advice is very clear
and that is that face coverings
have potential benefit in situations
where there's indoor spaces where people
cannot socially distance where they are
potentially crowded and they will come
into contact with multiple people so
that advice has been provided and should
form the basis of risk assessment in any
workplace to decide what should be done
it's absolutely the case in your right
the touching and surface contact is a
major form of spreading this disease and
therefore other measures including the
wearing of gloves can be important in
certain circumstances this needs to be a
risk by risk assessment into in
different workplaces to decide what's
appropriate for each individual
workplace and businesses that are
serving drinks to the public that may
wish to know exactly when and how to
wear either face coverings all masks
should get on to the website and look at
the cable secure guidelines for for
money the only thing to add I think
Patrick has covered of face coverings
very clearly is on on gloves if someone
touches the surface repeatedly without
changing gloves that's actually less
good than someone washing their hands
between every time they do it so hand
washing absolutely critical gloves can
be useful under certain circumstances
right Ruth I hope that's useful
you know gloves face coverings may very
well be important but hand washing
remains absolutely critical and can't be
stressed too much let's go to unless
you're in the in the Lake District
unless here's a question is will the
government's next review of regulations
include consideration of those people
who've not been able to see their
partners and will new guidance include
measures which facilitate seeing
partners including staying overnight
which may be necessary for those a long
distance away and well I think the
answer the answer to that is if you're
you have the option Alessia of making
use of
[Music]
you know the idea of a support bubble if
you haven't been able to see the rest of
your family for a for a very long time I
think that that is plainly designed to
to help you and you know we would want
to we would want to make sure that
people who have been suffering from
lenders who have been unable to see
their their families for a long time the
rest of their families are able to do
that because this is a new thing just to
be clear what what can be done and what
can't the idea of the bubbles is for
families which have a single adult in
the household so if this applied to two
families with a single adult in the
household that would be covered by what
the Prime Minister has just talked about
this idea of bubbling for other people
it's largely going to have to be around
meeting outside and that's the the key
is outside and socially distance because
the risk of transmission is much lower
to go back to the reason why we're doing
this because everybody can see exactly
why this question is so important why it
is so important for people want to see
their families and their partners it is
only by breaking the links between
households where things could be
transmitted that we can continue to keep
the are down as we take forward these
slow steady steps forward and the reason
for making the bubbling relatively
specific is that reduces the risk that
you're joining together several
households so that bubbling is about
single households or lone parents at
least one of the people will be in that
category and then there's a meeting
outside for other people I think unless
you just just a trying because I think
unless this question is also people want
to know you know if there is a single
household they can elect to be in a
support bubble with her with another
household but she asked about staying
overnight a long distance away we don't
generally want to encourage households
mingling but what's your reaction to
that so the what the suggestion about
bubbling is that this will allow people
who belong to a single household
or loan parents to stay if necessary but
this doesn't apply except in that
situation and the reason for that is
single single households will have many
fewer contacts and therefore it's
linking up many fewer households okay
well I hope that's helpful
a less year the answer is we're going
ahead now from I think from the from the
from SATA from the 13th we're going
ahead with the the support bubbles and
you've heard what Chris has said this is
this is intended for single households
where there's being particular
loneliness and an isolation and they
have the opportunity now to to form a
support bubble with another household
and and to stay overnight where
necessary I think that's that's clear
let's go to questions from from
journalists let's go to Laura Koons
burger the BBC and thank you very much
prime minister hi as Prime Minister have
you allowed a situation to arise where a
child can go and look at lions at the
zoo a single relative will now be able
to go and have Sunday dinner with their
family but in many situations that same
child might not be able to go back to
school until September and if I ask a
question to you all including Sir
Patrick and professor Witte Neil
Ferguson one of the other scientists who
was advising the government on lockdown
told MPs this afternoon if it had been
introduced a week earlier we would have
reduced the final death toll by at least
a half is he right
Laura can I just quickly go first to two
schools and yes of course as I said
earlier on we would we would like to be
in a position where we could have got
those the remainder of primary back for
a couple of weeks before the the summer
holidays we we wanted to to do that if
that was going to be possible because of
what Patrick the point Patrick and Chris
have been making about the continued
prevalence of the disease I mean 53,000
have it right now there are 30,000
39,000 new cases a
of a week clearly we've got it right
down but it's not quite done far enough
to change the the social distancing
measures that we have in in our schools
so what we'll be doing is a huge amount
of catch-up for pupils over the summer
months and the secretary for education
will be announcing Gavin Williamson will
be sending out a lot more next week
about the about the catch-up program and
I would also point out is that the BBC
has very helpfully put provided a guide
to what other European countries are
doing and you can see that actually you
know in Italy Ireland all schools remain
shut until September Spain no primary
schools going about very few primary
kids going back France and Germany only
partial openings we're very much in line
or or actually slightly ahead of some
other European countries in what we're
doing were you know we're taking a more
cautious approach than some but slightly
ahead of others and I think that's the
right place to be on the second question
I'm really going to ask the members of
Sage to comment in focus of the member
of sage and and his I think he went on
after that initial comment to say now's
not the time to second-guess and I think
the the general point is should we go
back and look carefully at the phasing
of the measures the different groups of
measures which one's made the biggest
impact can we see in retrospect which
ones are most important that's going to
be important for judging the future
should this happen again in the winter
and there's time to go back and do all
of that analysis I mean absolutely you
should go back and look it's very
important to understand very important
to shape whatever it is we do in the
future so I think those are important
scientific questions to address and they
haven't yet been fully addressed
completely obviously agree with Patrick
I mean we both come from a trade we're
looking back and working out what you
would have done knowing what you now
know is absolutely routine and it's how
you improve
on what you do but I think if we I mean
just on professor Ferguson's point oh
and I think a variety of different
people going to come with different
answers while the timing's question
actually we're not going to get an
identical situation to what we had then
not least because we actually know a lot
more and we'll have a lot more
information part of the problem we had
at that stage was that we had very
limited information about this far still
a lot we don't know but we know a lot
more now but what I think is much more
in critical for we do need to start
looking at even at this point is what is
the best combinations of measures that
have the biggest impact on reducing the
virus but have the least impact on
society for that effect and there's
clearly a very complicated balancing act
and that's partly for allowing us to lot
to release the various lockdown measures
in a in a sensible measured steady way
as the prime minister who is laying out
but we have to take that very very
carefully but we also have to accept
that we could find ourselves in one of
three situations one is where the virus
we actually have a situation where it
starts to escape control and that the
aim for going very slowly is to prevent
that from happening but that's a risk
and we need to know which ones to
reintroduce there the second situation
is we all think there is a reasonable
chance that in the winter this virus
will have some advantages it doesn't
have at the rest of the year it's
something which transmits more easily
indoors for example and therefore things
that are working well in summer and
autumn may cease to be working as well
in winter and we need to know what
combination of additional things we
might have to introduce or reintroduce
at that stage to cover a difficult
period of the year and then finally the
nature of new epidemics is very often
they come in waves circling around the
world and if we get hit by another wave
at that point we need to understand
better what is the optimal mix of things
we can do so I think there is a lot we
should be doing even at this stage to
work out optimum mixes of things
timings strike me as something which is
important we're learning more the whole
time will give a better answer to that
the whole time but that to some extent
doesn't really help us for the future to
the same extent
thanks very much and I just wanna repeat
I should have made it absolutely clear
in the beginning I hope I did that we
fully intend to get all schools all
pupils back by September if as I say the
science and our battle against the
disease allows it which I very much hope
they will but in the meantime I want to
thank teachers very much for all they've
done to keep so many schools open
throughout the crisis thank parents and
pupils it was never going to be easy to
to restart all of primary schools in the
way that we have but we've got a
substantial numbers now going back into
some of these years year six in in
particular it's growing every day and so
thank you very much we'll continue to
make make progress on that can we go - I
just I think we're not gonna have
follow-ups Laurel it with great respect
we haven't I haven't given four ups
before but you you desperate for
follow-up go on I think you need to
unmute Laura yeah I just could you
address that point made by Professor
Fergusson I well yes i I really have
nothing to add to the to the the views
of the members of Sage I think that you
know we'll have to all the all such
judgments I think will need to be
examined in the fullness of time and and
I was professor Ferguson was a member of
of Sage I think at the time as he as he
readily as he readily accepts Dan Huot
of ITB Thank You Prime Minister and
firstly on schools and the Tory chair of
the Education Select Committee's asking
you personally to intervene to take
charge of the situation with schools you
had a big plan to the economy with the
furlough scheme you had a big bank the
NHS with Nightingale hospitals where is
the big plan with education and getting
children back to school in September if
I may follow up on on Laura's question
regarding professor Fergusson he also
said today that
Britain missed 90% of its coronavirus
cases because we weren't screening
passengers at airports it's questions
all three of you are there no measures
at all that you look back on even now
months ahead months on that you think
actually yeah we did get that wrong we
could have introduced that earlier you
not ever think about those those big
measures you put in place well dad let
me just go first on on schools and say
that we do have a very big plan to get
all our pupils or pupils back to school
by September we've started getting
primary back already as you know from
from the 1st of June the numbers are
climbing every day and you know some
people who only last week were saying we
were we were being reckless in going too
fast and I was saying that we're going
too slow we think we're taking the the
right decisions at the right time to
beat the virus and by the way that point
really goes for for your second question
as well I think that we'll have to wait
and and see what the what the evidence
really says well I think you know Chris
and Patrick I might want to come back on
it but there are a lot of questions as
patrick said that are still clearly it's
not a matter of do we ever look back we
always look back that is the whole point
of having a scientific and medical
method is you look back and you say what
could we've done better and what can we
do for the future so absolutely should
there's always a question of timing and
there's always a question of what do you
do now even in the middle of something
and be very clear we are not at the end
of this epidemic not by a long shot
we're in the middle of it and what do we
actually wait til all the data comes in
and we look back and say these are the
right things to do so it's a fair
question but I want us to be very clear
all of us would say absolutely necessary
to look back and learn what you do
better any emergency post review post
emergency review is critical if everyone
would accept that that data came
actually not from your focus and it came
from a group looking at the genomics of
this that we fund it very early on in
this for exactly this reason to find out
what was going right what was going
wrong and we knew we wouldn't get the
answer till later but it's an important
part of what chris has just said
to always be prepared to get the data to
look back and find out what was right
what was wrong and what we know in
retrospect and that's an important part
of the scientific method thanks very
much
both Beth rubygems guy thank you
Sweden's top epidemiologist said last
week his Kovac 19 strategy had resulted
in too many deaths after he persuaded
his country to avoid a strict lockdown
today professor Ferguson said going into
lockdown a week too late
cost an estimated 25 thousand lives or
more so the same question please to all
three of you what is your biggest regret
and what do you now wish you've done
differently well Beth I really I really
can't go further than the answer that
that I've already given I I you know ask
Cristen Patrick to to comment on on that
of course you know we're gonna have to
look back at all of it and learn the
lessons that we can but frankly I think
that a lot of these questions are are
still premature and lots of things lots
of data lots of things that we still
don't know and this epidemic has a has a
long way to go alas not it's not just in
this country but around the world add to
that is you know we need to get the
information to find the answer to that
question it's an important question will
we have got everything right know for
sure we wouldn't there are some things
that we will have got wrong and we need
to make sure that we understand what
they are learn from them and get them
right next time and that's exactly what
we need to do and we shouldn't be just
guessing as to what those things are now
and it's a very complicated situation we
have much more information now that we
have then and we need to learn from it
and make sure that we use that to get
the next stages of this as effective as
they can be Christopher you want to add
anything and I think there's a long list
actually of things which we need to look
at very seriously if I was to choose one
he would probably be choose looking at
how we could to speed up testing very
early on in the epidemic and many of the
problems that we had
came because we were unable to actually
work out exactly where we were and we're
trying to see our way through the fog
rather rather more do with more
difficulty there are many good reasons
why it was tricky but I think if I was
to play things again and this is largely
based on what some other countries were
able to do particularly Germany I think
I've said this before I think that's the
one thing that we would probably have
put more emphasis on at an earlier stage
there are many others but I want to
highlight that one thanks thanks very
much yes not regret not going into
lockdown earlier is that lots of regrets
of yours given what you know now well
Beth I'm really gonna have to go back to
what Chris and Patrick have said because
I and you know we we made the decisions
at the time on the guidance of Sage
including professor Ferguson that we
thought were right for this for this
country and I think that the you know
the questions that are posed are still
unanswered and there's a lot of data
that we still frankly do not have and I
think it would be you know I know you
want me to to cast judgment now on
everything that happened in the in the
months that have gone by I just think
that that is that of course that moment
will come and of course we've got to
learn lessons but I you know I just
think that it is at this stage premature
there's still too much that we don't
know thanks very much Beth let's go to
Gordon Rayner of the Telegraph Thank You
Prime Minister on schools you've said
that your intention is to get all
children back in school by September the
problem at the moment as you said is
that you can only have class sizes of 15
so it seems that the only way that you
can get those children back is to either
increase the size of the school estate
so you have more room or relax the
2-meter rule in order to achieve that so
which is it going to be thanks Gordon
well of course that in primary schools
the the 2-meter rule isn't is not the
issue it's the it's the class
is that a the question but both really
affect the size of the of the school
estate in question whether you can get
all all all the pupils back the problem
is as I've said earlier on that the the
level of the epidemic that it is way way
down is not down as low as as we would
like in order to relax the social
distancing measures in in schools so
we're going to get all schools back in
September as I say if we possibly can
get all schools back in September but
it's going to be a big summer of
catch-up and not just a summer of
catch-up I should say Gordon it's going
to be we're going to keep making sure
that kids get the the remedial help that
they need for the stuff that they've
missed for months and months to come so
that they genuinely make up for lost
time so we want to have a you know
educational catch-up and an economic
bounce-back at the same time ask you a
quick follow-up prime minister the 2v2
rule obviously is what stopping pubs
restaurants and lots of other things
from reopening and so do you do you
agree that relaxing the 2-meter rule is
it is a political decision that's
ultimately up to you to take and are you
prepared to go against your scientific
advisers if they refuse to budge on to
meters thanks Gordon I think there's a
balance of risk to be struck and I think
the issue for for me is how far down we
can get the incidents of disease I mean
as Patrick has just said we've got only
one in a thousand people in this country
now with the with the virus however
there are still 53,000 people who have
it the our is only just below one we
have 30,000 more new cases per week it's
not it's not down as low as I would as I
would like and I have to be very very
mindful of the risk of new outbreaks
we've made colossal progress in the
sense that NHS tests and trace is able
- you know isolate local outbreaks with
a joint biosecurity Center is very very
helpful and enabling us to see what's
going on and we will be able to to do
whack-a-mole with with new AI brakes in
schools or all hospitals and we already
are but my judgment at present my
judgment at present is that we must
proceed cautiously I think that and I
think that is shared by the overwhelming
majority of the public they want us to
get on but they want us to get on in a
cautious way and that's what we're we're
doing the two meters is not a rule it is
not a scientific rule it is a risk-based
assessment on when risk reduces and the
risks are associated with distance so
risk Falls after two meters time what
mitigating factors you can put in place
which include things like whether you're
sitting side by side back to back or
face to face whether you've got face
coverings where there's ventilation and
other measures and the absolute risk by
the number of people who've got
infection at any one time and those
things which make up the overall risk
assessment of what needs to be taken
into account both in terms of policy
decisions and operationalization of this
in different business environments and
so wrong to portray this as a scientific
rule that says it is two meters or
nothing that's not what the advice has
been and it's not what the advice is now
and a series of measures explaining
under what conditions the risk may
differ with different distances time
mitigating factors in the absolute risk
thanks very much
Pippa Carrara Daily Mirror good
afternoon and promise new stickers
schools aren't yet fully back because
the rate of infection isn't quite low
enough so where the teaching unions
right to express caution and why hasn't
education been more of a priority when
it's so integral to what you say is your
core aim of leveling up the
economy and can I quickly ask the
scientists as well please the Prime
Minister set out how the five tests have
been met but in the plan to rebuild
document that he referred to on maybe
eleven it said that the changes the
lockdown and I quote must be warranted
by the current alert level which I think
is to look for but maybe you could
clarify that are you both completely
comfortable about the pace at which
we're using the lockdown thank you
people just obviously as schools are
safe to to go back to their safety your
children that's a very very important
point but we need to have in those
schools we need to have certain measures
the present time which are dictated by
the the state of the pandemic in this in
this country and so it's smaller class
sizes or the two meter rule and those
obviously dictate the physical
configuration of the school to make it
difficult to open up all primary schools
at once for all all pupils and and I
think people get that but we are going
to go ahead in September if we possibly
can opening up all schools all schools
from from September so you've got a lot
of primary coming back now years 10 and
12 getting face time with their teachers
from from Monday that will go ahead so
they can prepare for their exams next
year and a huge amount of catch-up work
so that pupils get help during the
summer and the autumn and beyond so that
they get the education they need and
deserve and that is that is our
objective and we I see massive
importance in this campaign not just for
you know for economic purpose of
treating the schools as you know because
we need to educate the next generation
but for for simple social justice
because after all so many pupils who
have not been getting education in
school have not had quite the the home
schooling that perhaps others have had
and it's vital that we we compensate as
fast and as far as as we can and and
that is what we're going to do priority
then education when you compare it to
it's been a massive I totally reject I
mean I respectfully people reject that
and I and I draw your attention if I
made the very helpful compilation by the
BBC of what other countries are doing
and you'll see that you know there are
plenty of countries in Iran in other EU
countries which are are not actually
getting primary schools back at all so
or until until September so you know
we're going as fast as we can we've
still got a pandemic to cope with we'll
get all schools back in September if we
possibly can and we're gonna have a
massive catch-up operation over the
summer and beyond which gavin williams
and will be will be setting out next
week so i go on the second one yes there
are no comfortable options and anyone
who pretends that as a comfortable
option has not understood the situation
we are in so I think of this as a every
doctor as every healthcare professional
would it's always about balance at risk
on all things that you have to deal we
know giving a drug through side-effects
doing an operation there are side
effects you have to take a risk because
that's the best thing to do at the time
we're obviously having in government to
balance a large number of risks all of
society's having to balance a large
number of risks but what you're trying
to do is manage those risks as best we
can with the information we have to
minimize the risk of a bad outcome and
to maximize the possibility of a good
outcome but the idea that there is some
option which is completely safe and it's
all fine is clearly not true and I don't
believe anyone listening to this things
that that is an option so what we think
is that this is a reasonable provided
people hear what the Prime Minister is
saying and stick to what the Prime
Minister is saying and don't try and
extend it out and the people who are
opening businesses stick to the covert
secure rules and people that are
reasonable in the way they do it our
view is this is a reasonable balanced
sensible way to go at this point in time
accepting there is always a possibility
as a Patrick and the Prime Minister has
said that if things start to go up
forward from now when it went under the
number of reasons we might have to go
back
a couple of paces but this seems a
reasonable way to go at this particular
point in time but not a risk-free one
and there are no risk-free options
ahead of us we get test rates and
isolate really working as part of this
that has to be part of this that's
absolutely right Thank You Maria Zachary
from the southern daily echo Thank You
Prime Minister 600 people from South
Hampton have been asked to volunteer for
a corona virus vaccine trial what would
you like to say to them and secondly the
pandemic has basically shut down the
main industry in the city the cruise
industry hundreds of jobs are at risk
and people fear for their future what
will you be doing to ensure the cruise
industry he's safe I will thank you very
much Maria
like all industries that the cruise
industry I think he's going to have to
go through in the short term at least a
period of of self reinvention to to make
sure that it is coated secure I've no
doubt that it can do it it's a great
great British industry will support it
in any way that we that we can and on
the the coronavirus trial the 600
patients in Southampton either I just
like to thank them very much for what
they're doing I don't know which which
vaccine they're they're trialing but
Patrick's the expert on on vaccines well
my message is the same which is thank
you very much because the way that
vaccines are gonna come through this is
obviously through clinical trials now
they've got to get into clinical trials
we've got to find out what works what
doesn't what side effects there are
which ones are tolerated which ones are
not tolerated which ones produce a big
immune response and so the way to do
that is volunteers and every time that
somebody volunteers for a trial that is
them being selfless for the rest of
society and so big thank you from me
just Maxine can I just finish off the
answer to the first one and it's not
just vaccine trials it's all trials and
actually Southampton has a real record
of citizens taking part in trials in
studies and this is the way medicine
progresses not just for growing a virus
but generally so an enormous thank you
for the whole of
what people do to volunteer thank you
very much and thanks to that time to
listen a lot of the questions that this
evening have been about you know what
did we get wrong in the past what do we
what do we say about what we may have
have got wrong in the past what I can
say is at the moment it is simply too
early to to judge ourselves we simply
don't know the answer to a lot of these
questions what I can tell you is we know
a lot more now than we did in January or
February or even March and one thing we
really do know about tackling a corona
virus is you have to proceed with
caution and that's what we're doing
we're announcing a series of what I hope
you will agree are reasonable steps on
shops on support bubbles on a private
prayer on a few other things to begin to
tentatively get our society back to
normal we will continue with our roadmap
we will continue to stick to our plan
and in the meantime I hope everybody
else all over all of you will continue
to stick to the advice as well very
simple advice follow the guidance wash
your hands stay alert control the virus
and save lives
thanks very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News